---
layout: post
title: "Liguistic 1 (1)"
subtitle: 'Course notes for Ling 1 (Week 1-2)'
author: "Yiqiao Jin (Ahren)"
header-style: text
mathjax: true
tags:
  - Linguistic
  - Natural Language Processing
---

This is the course notes taken from UCLA Liguistic 1 (Ling 1) (Week 1-2). The course is taught by Prof. [Harold Torrence](https://linguistics.ucla.edu/person/harold-torrence/).

## Week1

### Language & Linguistics
* Language is something we use subconsciously all the time, like an instinct.
  * Language can be seen as either a tool (for communication) or knowledge
* Linguistics is the scientific study of language.
* Methodology of linguistics:
  * make observations
  * form & test & revise hypotheses
  * develop theory matching results

### Motivating Examples
* [Expletive Infixation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expletive_infixation): when an expletive is inserted into a word for intensification.
  * e.g. abso-fuckin'-lutely
  * Finding: Native speakers can form intuition or unconscious knowledge about the correctness of their languages, like where to insert the infix in expletive infixation
* [McGurk effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McGurk_effect): the illusion occurs when the auditory component of one sound is paired with the visual component of another sound
* [Wug Test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean_Berko_Gleason#Children.27s_learning_of_English_morphology.E2.80.8D.E2.80.94.E2.80.8Cthe_Wug_Test)
  * Devised by Jean Berko Gleason
  * The finding is that children are able to pronounce plurals of noun's they've never heard
  * e.g. "This is a WUG. Now there is another one. There are two WUGs."

### Basic Concepts of Linguistics
* Phonetics: Sounds of a language
* Phonology: How sounds interact
  * e.g. How to pronounce the 's' in 'eels' [z], 'toads' [z] v.s. 'caps' [s], skunks [s].
* Morphology: word structures, i.e., how words are formed
* Lexicon: Your mental dictionary of the words you know
* Word: lexicon of the language or your mental dictionary
* Semantics: Meaning of words and sentences
* Syntax: How to build good phrases and sentences
  * e.g. In English, it is correct to say "a white dog" but NOT "a dog white" 
  * In Spanish, it is correct to say  "un perro blanco" where "blanco" means "white"
  * However, in some languages, the order is much less restrictive than in English. Ungrammatical expressions in English are considered correct in those languages


* Speakers usually create new words when they speak. Meanwhile, they are also analyzing words subconsciously
* e.g. creating words like "shopaholic" after observing words like "alcoholic"
* Universal Grammar (UG) is the basic blueprint that all human languages followTwo kinds of linguistic knowledge1.


### Linguistic Competence v.s. Performance
#### Linguistic Competence
* Represents your actual grammar system
* What you can do / what you know in your mind
* Systematic knowledge of the building blocks

#### Linguistic Performance
* Represents implementation of grammar knowledge in the world
* What you actually do / what comes out of your mouth

* Your linguistic performance doesn't always match your linguistic competence, e.g., slips of the tongue, like saying "Feris, Prance" when you actually mean "Paris, France
* Through speech errors, we can distinguish Linguistic Competence from Linguistic Performance


### Characteristics of language
#### 1. Arbitrariness

* Relationship between the form of a word and its meaning is arbitrary.
* That's one reason why the same word pronounces differently across languages
* e.g. in Japanese, "chair" is pronounced as "isu", which is totally unrelated to its English counterpart
* The same is true for sign languages, e.g. American Sign Language (ASL). The expression for "summer" and "ugly" are quite similar!
* Arbitrariness is less obvious for onomatopoeic words (words that mimic sounds like meow, buzz)

#### 2. Creativity

* Children can produce lots of utterances that they could not have heard from adults. 
* This means children exhibit linguistic creativity by creating sentences that are ungrammatical, different from adult languages (in limited ways).
  * "Who do you think who's in this box?"
  * These sentences may be ungrammatical, but are constructed using building blocks from adult English.
* Speakers use a **finite set** of building blocks to create new expressions.
* This suggests that sentences can't simply be memorized or learned by imitation.
* "John bought a car." -> "John bought a green car yesterday from the man who lived down the street."


#### 3. Structured by Universal Grammar (UG)

* The issue about whether we can identify the set of universal properties that are possessed by all languages
* All languages have lexicons, phonetic systems, phonology, morphology, syntactic structures, and semantics. So do sign languages.
* All languages have ways of forming questions.
* All languages have means of negating a sentence.
* All languages have means for indicating when an action takes place.
* All languages possess a set of discrete sounds or gestures - as in signed languages.
* Why UG matters? If there's a set of universal principles, would this make it easier for a child to acquire a language? What is the set of possible human languages?

### Properties of ALL human languages
1. Means of negating a sentence
2. Means for indicating when an action takes place 
3. a set of discrete sounds or gestures



#### Overgeneralization
* e.g. "I holded the rabbits"
* Finding: There is a strong biological component to language learning and language development.
* Children learn language by memorizing what they hear their parents say.
* Children do not acquire rules of grammar.

#### Development of Language
* All children undergo a stage of babbling.
* Then a stage of babbling with specific language sounds of their own language.
* Then they go to single-word utterances. 
* Then they go to two-word utterances. 
* All children exhibit overgeneralizations
* Typically, developing children become native speakers by around the age of five.


#### Descriptive Grammar
* Linguist's description/model of the mental grammar
* Focuses on what native speakers actually say
* 'He don't like it' - This is OK from the view of descriptive grammar. There are native speakers saying this
* 'He it like don't' - This is NOT OK since native speakers do NOT produce sentences like this



#### Prescriptive Grammar
* Rules of grammar a speaker must follow (e.g. used by teachers)
* "When we break these rules, can we still be correct?

Do double negatives make a positive?
* "He didn't buy nothing": This is NOT interpreted as affirmative / positive by native speakers
  
## Week2

#### Motivating Example
* Do you usually say "Whatzzup", "How are you doing?" or "How is it going?" when you greet other people?
* To whom / Under what context do you say these?
* Is any one of those greetings better than the others?

### Dialect
* Definition 1 (Popular definition): A type of pseudo-language spoken by uneducated people (socially disfavored people)
  * Under this definition, those who speak the language "correctly" do NOT speak a dialect
* Definition 2: speech different from your own, e.g. spoken by people in another region.
* Definition 3: Corrupted form derived from standard language. Thus they lack grammatic rules.


#### Linguistic View of Dialect:
* Any variety of language that is shared by a group of speakers
* Everyone speaks a dialect of some language
* There is no "worse/better" dialect
* A language is a collection of dialects. One of the dialect is adopted as the standard variety
* From a linguistic perspective, the standard variety of English or any other variety is just one dialect of the language.

#### Standard Language
* Selection: Most influential dialect usually becomes the standard language
* Literacy: It often has a written form
* Standardization: a grammar that provides the rules of the language
* Authoritative dictionary. e.g. Oxford English Dictionary
* Spelling is fixed. It usually has a "correct" way of pronunciation
* Public life: It is taught in schools or used in courts, etc.

* One dialect is considered a prestige dialect and are associated with positive attributes.
* Others are considered substandard dialects.Their speakers are considered lack of education, ignorant, etc.

#### Language variation
* How languages are used differently in different context
* e.g. Do you put stuff in a "bag" / "sack" / "poke"?
* Varies according to Geography, Social class, Political Ideology, Age, Gender, Situation, Time ...
* a language can have different dialects based on race or ethnicity.

#### Example | African American Vernacular English (AAVE)
* In this example, we compare AAVE with Standard American English (SAE)
* 1. In AAVE, double negatives does NOT make the sentence positive.
  * I don't know anybody (SAE) -> I don't know nobody (AAVE). 
  * I don't have any idea (SAE) -> I ain't got no idea (AAVE). 
  * The same is true for Spanish: No conozco a nadie ("conozco" means "know", "nadie" means "nobody". Double negatives do NOT cancel each other.)
* 2. AAVE exhibits Be-deletion
  * deleting the "be" verb in sentences
  * They are mine (SAE) -> They mine (AAVE).
  * However, Be-deletion is NOT arbitrary. There are certain rules that needs to be applied
  * e.g. "He as nice as he say he" is WRONG
  * This proves that dialects can be grammatical

#### Eckert's Study in 1989
* a.k.a. the study of Jocks and burnouts
* Negative Concord: When we express negative meanings in a sentence, we make everything in the sentence negative.
* Finding: there is a strong correlation between the social status of the investigated students and how often they employed or used these non-standard English constructions, like negative concord.
* This shows that some variations we observe in a language is actually socially based
* There is significant difference in use of negative concords between the two groups
* Jock girls use the lowest negative concords
* "Burned-out" burnouts have the highest use of negative concords


There are a number of "classic" **stigmatized** features found in American dialects in American dialects

* Double negation: "They didn't say nothing." 
* Regularized verb forms: "she growed up" instead of "she grew up."
* Similarly, for S-drop: Study from Detroit and Norwich shows that there is a direct relationship between the S-drop and social class (higher social class -> lower s-drop)

#### Discourse particles
* e.g. for SAE: "you know", "actually", "basically", "like", "I mean", "okay" ...

#### Case study | Singlish
* Singapore had the "Speak good English!" movement, which discouraged the use of Singlish and promotes SAE e.g. making distinction between singular / plural, past tense ...
* Discourse particles (endings) like lah, lor, leh are NOT used
* "what": usually means that something is obvious, or in some cases, mark contradiction
* "meh": marks skepticism
* V ery informal Singlish words like Koyak, Bochap are avoided

#### Register
* The variation of formality

#### Colloquial English Variation
* Case study: The colloquial use of "like"
* "like" can be used in many other occasions, aside from "prefer" and comparison
* These additional uses of "like" are usually thought to be meaningless, or a sign that the person has a limited vocabulary, or a limited ability to articulate
* However, study shows that "like" has a number of specific but distinct uses, and it's not meaningless!
* 1. "like" can serve as a **quotative of complimentizer**, where it introduces a quote. 
  * e.g. "She was like, OK, but I don't normally fry rutabagas."
  * This is an innovative use of "like". That's why some people disfavor it.
* 2. "like" can serve as an **approximative adverb**
  * e.g. "Mary read like seven books in two weeks."
* 3. "like" can serve as signals of **exemplification, illustration, or explanation**
  * e.g. "One of my cat's meow so much, because, like, he's really picky about the food he will eat."
  * "like" helps connect sentences causally
* 4. "like" can serve as a **discourse particle**
  * e.g. "He's, like, dumb or something. He seems nice, but he's, like, real dumb."
* The funny thing about the colloquial "like" is that people often associate these uses of "like" with young people, adolescents, and with women
* However, these colloquial uses of like are not new. They've been around in New Zealand  since 19th century


#### linguistic profiling 
* Using characteristics of a person's speech to identify him as a member of a particular group.

#### Study by Purnell, Idsardi, and Baugh in 1999. 
* Goal: find out whether there was dialect-based discrimination and whether ethnic group affiliation was recoverable from speech.
* They focus on SAE, AAVE, and Chicago English (ChE)
* Finding: The language Baugh (the researcher) used in making appointments is highly related to the confirmed appointments he got.
* There seems to be discrimination based on linguistic profiling that is related to ethnicity and race.

#### Summary
* Negative attitudes towards features of dialects and colloquial speech have real world consequences
* Attitudes towards racial and ethnic minorities that are filtered through language or discussed through language and in these cases identified through language. 