---
layout: post
title: "Liguistic 1 (2)"
subtitle: 'Course notes for Ling 1 (Week 3-4)'
author: "Yiqiao Jin (Ahren)"
header-style: text
mathjax: true
tags:
  - Linguistic
  - Natural Language Processing
---

This is the course notes taken from UCLA Liguistic 1 (Ling 1) (Week 3-4). The course is taught by Prof. [Harold Torrence](https://linguistics.ucla.edu/person/harold-torrence/).

## Week3

Questions

* Where is language processed in the brain?
* Are all aspects of language processed in the same area of the brain? 
* What happens if the language areas of the brain is damaged?

There are 2 types of brain cells we focus on: neurons and glia

neurons
* The neurons are cells that process information and send electrical impulses. 
* Neurons initiate impulses

* The glia are cells that provide support and protection to the neurons.

* axons are paths in which electrical impulses go out of the cells
* the corpus callosum is a bundle of axons, or white matter
* it allows the left and right hemisphere to communicate  
* cortex is the "shell" of the brain. Sometimes called "grey matters"
* corpus callosum: a bundle of axons, or white matters. Allows left and right hemispheres to communicate

### Contralateral Control
* Stimuli from one side of the body are processed first in the opposite-side hemisphere.
* important in sensory input, e.g. touch, hearing, and vision
  * A stimulus appearing in the right visual field of both eyes is first processed in the left hemisphere.
  * Then it goes through the corpus callosum and also get processed in the right hemisphere.
  * Finally, both hemispheres can share that information

### Localization
* Each part of your brain has its own dedicated functions (cognitive abilities)
* Introduced by Phrenology (a FALSE theory): certain aspects of your personality were encoded in different parts of your brain. It was possible to measure these different aspects of your personality by feeling and measuring the bumps on your skull. Development of those areas cause "bumps" in your brain
* both written and spoken language are lateralized to the left hemisphere 

### Dichotic listening
* a test where we simultaneously play two distinct sounds into each ear.
  * e.g. 
* Findings:
* Almost always, subjects report hearing only one sound.
* They almost always report hearing the sound that is played into the right ear.
* Significance: Given the principle of contralaterally, if a sound stimulus is presented to the right ear, it's first processed in the left hemisphere.

### Split brain
* The patient's corpus callosum is severed. Then no communication occurs between the two hemispheres
* Conclusion: linguisic abilities are lateralized to the left hemisphere 

Are all aspects of language processed in the same area of the brain
What happens if there is brain damage in the language areasLateralization
* The tendency for some neural functions or cognitive processes to be specialized to one side of the brain or the other

### WADA test
* anesthetizing one hemisphere of the brain and test which areas in the brain are responsible for controlling your speech and memory.
* In the experiment, when the patient hold an object in his left hand, he is able to identify the item through multiple-choice questions, but cannot describe the object verbally (cannot giving a linguistic response).
* In all, the three experiments: Dichotic listening, Split brain patients, and WADA test all suggest that language is lateralized to the left hemisphere.

### aphasia
* Loss of language

### Wernicke's aphasia vs Broca's Aphasia

Broca's aphasia (expressive aphasia, anterior aphasia)
* Broca's area is a region in the frontal lobe of left hemisphere 
* These people have trouble forming sentences but can understand language.
* They may have problems understanding complicated sentences
  * e.g. passive sentence like "The car is pushed by the truck."
* Others can usually understand what the patients mean through their labored speech.
* In all, Semantics and Comprehension are OK, but Syntax (structures) and Writings of the language is NOT OK

Wernicke's aphasia (semantic aphasia, receptive aphasia, posterior aphasia)
* Wernicke's area is in the temporal lobe
* happens when Wernicke area, the area of brain that controls language, is damaged.
* patients' comprehension is impaired. They have fluent speech, but their utterances are incomprehensible
* it is very difficult for us to understand what the patients try to say
* caused by damage to the part of your brain that controls language.
* It leads to a loss of language ability.
* In all, Syntax (structures) is OK, but Semantics, Comprehension and Writings of the language is NOT OK

* Spoken and signed languages are interrelated because signed languages activate Wernicke's Area as well as Broca's Area.

Anomia
* Patients have difficulties naming objects. But the syntax is fine.

### fMRI
* Oxygenated blood has differnt magnetic properties from de-oxygenated blood, and give a larger MRI signal
* Thus fMRI can measure which areas of the brain are active

In an experiment, researchers observe 3 kinds of subjects
* 1. native speaking, hearing English speakers who silently read English sentences
* 2. hearing speakers of British Sign Language, i.e. people who are hearing native speakers of English, but also knew British Sign Language
* 3. native deaf signers of British Sign Language who saw British Sign Language sentences. So here are the results. So for the hearing English speakers, so, remember, that they were just silently reading English sentences, take a look at the fMRI image of their left hemisphere. So what do you see? Yes, thankfully, we see that Broca's area in the frontal lobe and Wernicke's area in the temporal lobe are lighting up in the left hemisphere. And as expected, not a whole lot is going on in the right hemisphere. The second group of subjects who are the native speaking English hearing British Sign Language signers, remember, they saw British Sign Language sentences, and in the left hemisphere, notice voila, once again. So these people 

* Results: For all 3 groups, their Broca's area in the frontal lobe and Wernicke's area in the temporal lobe are both very active (in the left hemisphere). The right hemisphere stays relatively inactive
* Conclusion: Although sign languages and spoken languages use different modalities, they are processed in the same areas of the brain. 

### Specific Language Impairment (SLI)
* Very specific types of difficulty with language
* Children with SLI often omit "function" or grammatical words like of, the, is ...
  * Show me knife.
  * It not long one.
  * "He like me" instead of "Does he like me"
  * "Those dog" instead of "Those dogs"
* Children with SLI may start speaking late. They may be hard to understand.
* Children with SLI fall in the typical IQ range and normal ability in all other areas, including speech comprehension and hearing.
* Finding from SLI: There is a dissociation between intelligence and language ability.

### Williams Syndromes
* Patients have limited IQ (40-90, on average 50) and spatial & motor skills (may not be able to tie shoes or cut with a knife)
* Extremely social and friendly
* High level of vocabulary and grammar; sometimes slightly "off" semantics
* Better-than-average in facial recognition
* love music
* Experiments show that patients of Williams syndrome are very good at identifying multiple meanings of homonyms
  * e.g. "club" means "a secret kind of club and a club with spurs, those pointy things ..."

### Linguistic Savants
* linguistic savants are people with low general intelligence, but very high language abilities. 
  * e.g. Christopher with nonverbal IQ 60-70
  * they CANNOT understand concepts of math or time
  * they CANNOT draw or understand spatial relationships
  * they CAN read upside down or backwards!
* Savants are important because they show that low IQ can be accompanied by high language ability

* In all, dichotic listening, Wernicke's aphasia, Broca's aphasia, and fMRI techniques, and the Wada test show that language is lateralized to the left hemisphere of the brain
* SLI, specific language impairment, Williams syndrome, and linguistic savants show that language seems to develop in its own way that is separate from general intelligence


## Week4

### Phonetics

* The study about how speech sounds are produced, transmitted, and perceived. 
* The phonetic inventory of a language is the set of sounds in the language
* If you know the phonetic inventory of a language, you can recognize certain sounds that are possible in that language
  * e.g. pa-, ba-, fa- are possible in English. However, tx'yang is NOT possible in English


### Production of Speech Sound

6 vocal tracts
* Alveolar ridge: Your tongue tap it when you say "ta-"
* Hard palate: Center of your mouth just behind Alveolar ridge
* Soft palate/velum: produces "ngah"
* Uvula
* Pharynx
* Glottis: Produces sounds of "Ah-oh"

why we do NOT use English spelling to represent the sounds of language
1. In English spelling, sometimes the same symbol is used to represent different sounds. 
* "h" is pronounced in "house" but NOT in "hour"
* "c" is pronounced as "k" in "clip" but "s" in "ice"
2. The same sound is represented with different symbols
* e.g. "Did he believe that Caesar would see the people seize the seas?"
* The "f" in puff v.s. "rough "
* This means English spelling is NOT consistent
* Instead, we use IPA

### International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)
* In IPA, one symbol corresponds to one and ONLY one sound.
* IPA is universal. We can use it to represent the sounds of any natural human language.
* IPA symbols are enclosed in square brackets. 
* Consonants are distinguished using 3 features:
  * place of articulation
  * manner of articulation
  * voicing
* Articulation means the tongue interacts with some other part of the vocal tract.

### Places of Articulation
i.e. where is the tongue interacting with the vocal tract?

* Bilabials
  * Sounds made by touching the two lips together
  * These include the initial consonants in pie [p], buy[b], my [m]
* Labiodental
  * Sounds produced by touching the bottom lip to the upper teeth.
  * These include the initial sounds in five, fan [f] and view, van [v]
* Interdental
  * Sounds produced with the tongue between your two teeth.
  * These include thigh [$\theta$], thus
* Alveolars. 
  * Sounds articulated against the alveolar ridge
  * These include the initial sounds in tie, die, night, sip, zip, light, rock. 

* Palatals
  * Sounds that have a place of articulation farther back. Produced by raising the front part of the tongue to the hard palate (the center of the roof of your mouth). 
  * The middle sound in "mission" - sh.
  * The middle sound in "measure" - zh.
  * The sound at the beginning of a word like "cheap" - ch
  * The sound at the beginning of the word "judge" - juh

